[Music]
3.8 billion gallons that's how much
water people drink around the world
every day it might sound like an entire
ocean but it only counts for about 1/2
of 1% of the water on earth and we're
running low so what if we had entire
oceans of fresh water instead of the
undrinkable salty KY at first glance it
seems like a fairy tale
you see people live on land that's
surrounded by ginormous puddles of h2o
and sodium chloride that's pretty much
useless to us if we're talking about
drinking and consuming the stuff that is
by the way those are the chemical
compound names for water and salt if
you're hoping to earn some extra credit
here lots of people on certain parts of
continents don't have access to fresh
water from rivers or lakes and this
crisis is getting more and more serious
each year every seventh person on the
planet suffers from a lack of access to
clean drinkable water right now and some
experts say that as the world population
doubles by 2030 that statistic will
skyrocket to 1/2 so wouldn't it solve
the problem if we had an unlimited ocean
of fresh water the short answer is nope
but first it's important to understand
why our oceans are briny to begin with
it seems so disappointing that we have
all this water around us yet we can't
drink it so people go without well let
me break it down for you
rivers constantly bring fresh water to
the oceans you'd think these sources
would dilute the sea and decrease the
salt content but in fact it's quite the
opposite water in rivers is also
brackish is just 70 times less salty
than in the ocean on its way to the sea
rivers wash out solve from rocks and
carry it with them
once the water reaches its destination
that salt remains in the ocean but the
extra water doesn't dilute the overall
salt content because it evaporates this
is the same reason why rivers aren't
that salty they carry and dump it all
into the sea each year four billion tons
of salt are carried into the ocean just
from rivers alone if you keep doing that
for the billions of years this planet
has been in existence you can imagine
how much salt would gather there
hey you don't even need to imagine I'll
tell you right now 50 quadrillion tons
that's 50 followed by 15 zeroes go ahead
write it out I'll wait for you no I
won't that's how much salt is in our
world's oceans if you take away all the
water you'd be left with a layer of salt
almost 500 feet thick now just imagine a
margarita glass big enough to use that
okay so rivers have been adding salt to
the ocean for years and years and years
and years and years does that mean salt
water was originally fresh hmm maybe the
problem with that theory is the fact
that the salt composition in rivers and
oceans is different sea salt derives
from a hydrochloric acid
well river salts are from carbonic acid
more scientists today believe that the
oceans have been salty from the start
because of volcanic activity to really
simplify a highly complex process the
stuff that these early volcanic
eruptions produced would pour to the
earth in the form of acid rain and react
with the rocks that would later become
the seabed the result of that reaction
was a brackish solution also known as
salt okay
now that you know 97% of all the water
on the planet has always been brining
you can safely assume that it's this way
for a reason and magically pushing a
button to make it fresh water in this
hypothetical situation would be
devastating for life on this planet
the most obvious consequence is that the
innumerable forms of marine life can
only
just in briny water they wouldn't
survive in freshwater now we only know
about a little over 200 thousand species
of oceanic life but that's just a drop
in the bucket albeit a very very big
bucket there could be millions more so
what would that mean for us humans well
without them we'd lose this source of
food which would have a serious impact
on not only the countries that are
highly dependent on their fishery
sectors but also those they export to
you must also consider the ten thousand
known species of underwater algae algae
are unique as they're both plants and
animals like animals algae are capable
of feeding on organic material in their
environment like plants they take part
in photosynthesis they play a huge role
in sustaining life because of this just
imagine how severe the drop in oxygen
and the spike in carbon dioxide levels
will be without all this salt water
loving algae this means the greenhouse
effect will intensify and we're already
having enough problems with that as it
is in short the global ecosystem would
collapse as all the existing food chains
would be destroyed oh but it doesn't
stop there the oceans play a critical
role in shaping the climate more
specifically its ocean currents that can
really affect the weather even on land
ocean currents exist mainly because of
density differences remember as surface
water evaporates under the hot Sun the
salt gets left behind this saltier water
is denser and sinks causing it to be
cooler than the less dense water on the
surface this movement of water while
sinking and rising is one major thing
that causes ocean currents of course
other things like wind and landforms
play their part too but that's a whole
other video itself if you'd be
interested in seeing something like that
let me know down in the comments anyway
these currents influence the climate by
transporting heat they can carry warmed
or cooled water as far as several
thousand miles
the displaced water can then warm or
cool the air in the land over which this
air blows the Gulf Stream brings warm
water from the tropical and subtropical
Atlantic northward and bathe the shore
of Western Europe as a result the
climate there is much warmer than it
could be in other parts at that latitude
thus Glasgow's climate is a lot milder
than say Moscow Russia even though
they're both at the same latitude on the
globe
so yeah ocean currents make the climate
on earth a lot more tolerable and
suitable for living take salt from the
oceans and the currents will disappear
and then I guess Western Europeans would
be donning furry Russian hats salt water
has a much lower freezing temperature -
without the salt bigger parts of the
oceans would turn to ice during the
winter hot climatic zones would get
hotter cold ones colder bigger storms
would happen more frequently both on
land and in the ocean the climate
changes would be so drastic that life on
Earth for the existing species becomes
impossible plus all that salt would
eventually start appearing right back in
the oceans minerals from the Earth's
crust would start dissolving into the
sea again and oceanic floor vents would
also pump minerals into the water so
perhaps it's best if we just leave all
the NaCl and the h2o and look too bright
scientific and innovative minds to think
of ways to solve the world's freshwater
crisis and of course we can all do our
part by being a little more careful
about our consumption come on you don't
need that hour-long shower no matter how
relaxing it might be hey you're a bright
mind do you know any ways to get more
fresh water sure your ideas in the
comments if you learned something new
from the video then give it a like share
it with a friend and here are some more
cool videos to check out from the bright
side of life